---

title: CV
toc: include

---

# Summary

I am a software developer with a large experience in very diverse fields.  I
have worked as a backend developer, have wrote desktop applications, simulation
software as well as network servers.

I have had the chance to work with low level object-oriented programming such
as C++ which I have used professionally for more than ten years, and also with
very high level functional programming languages such as Haskell. Theses
different approaches give me a good comprehension of the mechanisms at work in
software development, always driven by the goal of developing correct, safe and
robust software.

My CV is also available in pdf in
[english](https://github.com/jecaro/cv/raw/master/resume-en/jeancharles.quillet-en.pdf)
and
[french](https://github.com/jecaro/cv/raw/master/resume-fr/jeancharles.quillet-fr.pdf).

# Skills

**Architecture and software design**

With all the different projects I have seen and work on, I now have a pretty
good understanding of the tradeoffs which are important in software design.  I
also have a good knowledge on how to handle legacy code which is a big part of
the job.

**Programming languages**

I am very interested in programming languages and I have worked with a lot of
them. Such as, I am able to dive into a new one in no time. I usually know
already most of the concepts whether it relates to object-oriented, imperative
or functional languages, low or high level. I am particularly fond of strong
typing and functional programming.

**System administration**

Over the years, I had to administrate Linux systems both professionally and
personally. My favorites Linux distribution is [Arch
Linux](https://archlinux.org/), but I know also quite well
[NixOS](https://nixos.org/), [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/),
[Debian](https://www.debian.org/) and [CentOS](https://www.centos.org/).

**Languages**

I am fluent in French and English both written and spoken.

**Others**

Geographic Information Systems, 3D geometry, image analysis, scripting, version
control

# Work experience

**[Secucloud](https://www.secucloud.com/)** - Hamburg, Germany / Remote (Since
11/2020)

As a Haskell developer, I work on network security software in a cloud
architecture.

---

**[EPITECH](https://www.epitech.eu/en/)** - Rennes / France (Since 09/2021)

I support the students with their Haskell projects (arithmetic evaluator, Lisp
interpreter, image compressor, ...).

---

**[Scalian](https://www.scalian.com/)** - Rennes, France (04/2007 - 11/2020)

As a subcontractor, I developed fixed price software for clients such as the
French MoD and public research labs ([ONERA](https://www.onera.fr/),
[CEA](https://www.cea.fr/), CNES, [IRSN](https://www.irsn.fr/)). Most of the
projects consists in simulation software backed with heavy scientific models
developed by physicists.

I worked as an architect and lead developer. I also did a lot of mentoring.

I worked on a lot of projects there but the highlight was one project I did
with the [ONERA]. We developed a radar simulation software for the [University
of Singapore](https://www.nus.edu.sg/). It was a desktop application written in
C++/Qt interfaced with the simulation in matlab. The terrain on which the
simulation runs could be up to a surface of 300 km² and was generated from
actual data coming from [openstreetmap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/). This
project involved a lot of technical challenges in terms of performances, data
size and geometric computation.

---

**[LaBRI](https://www.labri.fr/)** - Bordeaux, France (07/2006 – 08/2006)

I prepared the video indexing contests [TRECVID](https://trecvid.nist.gov/) and
ARGOS with heavy scripting and administrated the SVN server for the team.

---

**[INRIA](https://inria.fr/en)** (French IT research laboratory) - Bordeaux,
  France (09/2004 – 04/2006)

In the IPARLA team, I worked on using non-photorealistic algorithms to render
complex data on mobile devices. This ends up by the writing and presentation of
[a scientific publication](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1122591.1122595) at
the [Web3D conference](https://www.web3d.org/conferences) in Washington.

---

**[Keyghost]** - Christchurch, New-Zealand
  (04/2003 - 12/2003)

In [Keyghost], I worked on a desktop application for a hardware keylogger.

---

**Visualpix** - Bordeaux, France (04/2002 - 12/2002)

I improved a proprietary video compression algorithm, implementing a spatial
index computed in real-time.

---

**Glisshouse** - Marseille, France (07/2000 - 03/2001)

This was my first work experience, working as a backend developer and system
administrator in a web startup company right at the moment the dot.com bubble
crashed. I was pretty much the only computer guy in the place so I learned a
lot from this experience in a very short amount of time.

# Extracurricular Activity

When I am not behind a computer, I like spending time with my family, rock
climbing, reading, playing the guitar or attending rock concerts.

I did quite a lot of volunteering in concert venues in Rennes
([Antipode](https://antipode-mjc.com/) 2011-2015, [le jardin
moderne](http://www.jardinmoderne.org/) 2009-2010) and in music festivals
(Epipapu (2009, 2010) and [la Route du Rock](https://www.laroutedurock.com/)
(2008 - 2018).

[Keyghost]: https://www.keyghost.com/
[ONERA]: https://www.onera.fr/
