---

title: This website is generated by Hakyll
lastmod: 2022-10-31
toc: true

---

# Why ?

That's it ! I've setup an [Hakyll][hakyll] website: the one you're currently
browsing.

I started working as a freelance developer and I needed a website for this
activity. As I know there is this out there this great library called
[Hakyll][hakyll] to generate static websites, I couldn't help using Haskell for
this job. The feedback from the users of the library are usually great, so I
needed to give it a go. It should be a great way to do something useful and
have fun in the same time.

# Hakyll

Basically, what [Hakyll][hakyll] does is to read some content written in any
format supported by [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/), and apply templates to
generate html pages. Each resource, files or images, can have metadata
associated to them that can then be used in the templates.

[Hakyll][hakyll] can also check that the links in the generated website are
valid which is great. It also has a command which starts a local web server and
watch for any modification in the current directory. When any modification
occurs a build of the site is triggered. It makes the workflow of working on
the content of the website very nice: edit a file, save it and hit F5 in the
browser to see the result.

# This website

So here it is. The website is up and running and I'm very satisfy by the
experience overall. I didn't want to write any html so the pages of this
website are generated from markdown files exclusively. I have one Haskell
executable in charge of generating the whole site. I've also written a small
[script][deploy.sh] to deploy the website on the server. The whole source code
of the website is visible on
[github](https://github.com/jecaro/jeancharles.quillet). Feel free to check it
out.

I wanted a very simple and straight forward structure. So here it goes:

* there is an
  [index.md][index.md]
  at the root of the website
* some other pages are located in the [pages][pages] directory
* some blog posts are located in the [posts][posts] directory

These are the files and directories I put with my content in. When I want a new
page, I add it to the [pages][pages] directory. When I write a new post, I add
a new file in the [posts][posts] directory. Simple, easy. Then [Hakyll][hakyll]
let me automate the conversion of these files in html and the generation of
these pages:

* the [posts](/pages/posts.html) page which contains all the blog posts
* the last posts list on the [index](/) page
* the [rss](/rss.xml) feed
* the [sitemap.xml](/sitemap.xml)

# Design

One last thing, I needed to sort out was the actual design of the website. As I
can cope with anything related to code. I have a very hard time making a design
from scratch that I actually like. I must confess I'm not very good at choosing
colors, fonts, sizes and offsets. Well I guess that's not my thing. Fortunately,
there is plenty of good looking websites I can get inspiration from.

I stubbled on this [website](https://jip.dev/) which I like the design very
much. Its author Jorge was kind enough to let me use its design as a template.
And I'm very thankful to him for that.

# Conclusion

I'm very happy about how it goes. The experience of using [Hakyll][hakyll] was
great. The workflow is nice and easy and I like the website design. So I'm
looking forward adding more content to it.

[hakyll]: https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/
[posts]: https://github.com/jecaro/jeancharles.quillet/tree/0e03b66343995e3a02fd0b13f2d67ceb11da7423/posts
[pages]: https://github.com/jecaro/jeancharles.quillet/tree/0e03b66343995e3a02fd0b13f2d67ceb11da7423/pages
[deploy.sh]: https://github.com/jecaro/jeancharles.quillet/tree/0e03b66343995e3a02fd0b13f2d67ceb11da7423/deploy.sh
[index.md]: https://github.com/jecaro/jeancharles.quillet/blob/0e03b66343995e3a02fd0b13f2d67ceb11da7423/index.md
