---

title: The coolest DIY project around

---

As a kid from the 80s, one of my first contact with video games was playing
with the gameboy. My little brother had the chance to have one and I have fond
memories of playing Mario, Zelda and of course Tetris.

I lost interest in video games in the same time I got interested in
programming. I found out that programming was way more fun than playing video
games. And even if I have some nostalgia of this time, each time I turn on a
video game I can hardly play more than five minutes without feeling I'm wasting
my time.

I got interested again in video games running into the [sudomod
community][sudomod] during a random web roaming. The members of this community
build awesome handheld devices out of Raspberries or others SOCs. Theses
devices are so cool that I decided I needed one even if I'm not anymore into
video games.

So I bought an electronic card called the [circuit sword][circuit-sword]
developed by [kite](https://kiteretro.com/). And with it I was able to build
this little handheld:

![](/images/GB_front.jpg){.center width=300}

It's a kit which comes with a card, a Raspberry CM3 and a 320x240 color screen.
All I needed was a gameboy shell, some buttons, a screen protector and a
battery. Theses things can still easily be bought on aliexpress. I was shocked
to find out that it is still possible to buy brand new gameboy shells and
buttons on aliexpress.

The [circuit sword][circuit-sword] can handle various button layouts. I decided
to go with four buttons on the front and four buttons on the back. Additionally
it embeds a WiFi module and has a USB socket, HDMI output, and a jack socket.

See how theses ports fits perfectly well the existing gameboy socket
placeholders: HDMI in place of the contrast wheel, SD card in place of the
volume wheel, USB in place of the game link port. I only had to dremel a bit to
make room for the USB C connector. This [circuit sword][circuit-sword] is a
very well thought piece of engineering.

::: { style="text-align:center" }
![](/images/GB_left.jpg){width=128}
![](/images/GB_back.jpg){width=313.5}
![](/images/GB_right.jpg){width=142}
:::

The embedded RPI is the CM3 variant. It is quite powerful and can easily handle
emulation up to the PS1. Here is a picture of the inside:

![](/images/GB_inside.jpg){.center}

This was a very fun experience to build this device. A little bit of dremeling,
a little bit of soldering, some 3D printing, a lot of patience and care and
that's it. Each time I ran into problem, I could reach the [sudomod][sudomod]
boards where the people are immensely friendly and helpful. At the end, it
feels very good to play on a handheld I built myself.

At this time, I spent a lot of time commuting to work by train. And once my
handheld was built I had a lot of fun playing some all time classic games, like
Zelda, Super Metroid or Another World (but only in the train otherwise it feels
like I'm wasting my time).

[circuit-sword]: https://github.com/kiteretro/Circuit-Sword
[sudomod]: https://sudomod.com/
