---

title: Advent of code 2023
lastmod: 2023-01-30

---

That's it! I'm done with [advent of code][advent_of_code_github] for this year. 
I had the chance to have a bit of free time this year in December, so I thought 
it would be cool to tackle that advent of code challenge everybody in the 
developer community is talking about. It was the first time I was able to 
participate. I hope I'll be able to do it again in the future because it is 
incredibly fun.

![](/images/advent_of_code_2023.png){.center}

With my years of developing experience, I was confident I could handle the 
rhythm of one puzzle a day and at the same time do it in a language I was not 
very familiar with, Rust. I have written [a small project][diverk] in Rust 
sometime ago, and I wanted to bring my knowledge one step further and learn 
this language for good. One month of intense problem-solving in Rust would make 
it at last.

Considering the language, Rust is actually a pretty decent choice when it comes 
to solving AOC puzzles. Indeed, strong typing offers nice guarantees that the 
code is going to do what it is meant to. And the good performance of the 
language allows brute force a lot of the problems without too much thinking.

The first thing that struck me was that the challenges were way harder than I 
expected. Here is how the whole thing is organized. You have one puzzle to 
solve a day. Each puzzle comes in two-parts. The first one is usually not too 
hard and can be solved with a direct or, call it naive, approach. The second 
part is somehow a variation of the first one. But there is a catch. Very often 
the solution developed for the first part blows up in complexity for the second 
part: time or memory.

And this is where the fun actually begins. How come those two closely related 
problems need to be solved in different algorithmic approaches? I can only bow 
to [Eric Wastl][eric_wastl], the person behind all this, for his amazing work. 
This two-parts organization is incredibly crafted. The same remark goes for the 
input data, which is different for every participant by the way. The tests are 
always very helpful and fit smoothly into unit tests. And not to mention the 
crystal clear explanations of each puzzle! All of this is very well done. And 
if [AOC][advent_of_code_website] took me so much time to solve, I can not 
imagine how much time [Eric Wastl][eric_wastl] takes to prepare it every year.

One thing that I did not foresee thus was that 25 days is a long time. After 
solving all the problems I was a bit exhausted. Depending on how clean you want 
your solution to be, I do, it can easily eat all your free time. Also, the 
puzzles are getting slightly harder each day. Interestingly, having a tight 
time constraint makes the challenge very close to real work in this regard. In 
my opinion, it is a good thing when it comes to learning a new language. It 
puts you in the shoes of a working developer. Debugging can be quite hard 
sometimes as some of the algorithms involve very big numbers. This also feels 
like real-life work. At day job, it is very often that we have some weird 
behavior that is hard to reproduce and inspect. Being creative on how to debug 
programs is a very important skill for a developer. Tackling that kind of 
problem helps to practice this skill.

I had heaps of fun with [Advent of Code][advent_of_code_website]. All my 
solutions are on [GitHub][advent_of_code_github]. I find it refreshing to hack 
on those puzzles. In everyday job, it is unfortunately very rare to run into 
such interesting algorithmic problems. And it feels good practicing pure 
algorithmic problem-solving.

To finish this post, I want to mention the [leaderboard page][leaderboard] from 
the website. It shows how much time the fastest people take to solve the 
problems. Sometimes a couple of minutes when it takes me hours. This is crazy. 
But let's recognize that we are not in the same positions here. My primary goal 
is not to be the fastest but to learn a new language while having fun! That 
goal is achieved along the challenge. I'm happy with that.

[diverk]: https://github.com/jecaro/diverk
[eric_wastl]: http://was.tl/
[advent_of_code_github]: https://github.com/jecaro/advent-of-code-2023
[advent_of_code_website]: https://adventofcode.com/2023
[leaderboard]: https://adventofcode.com/2023/leaderboard


